The Necklace
by Guy de Maupassant
She was one of those pretty and charming girls, born as if by a mistake of destiny into a family of clerks.[1][2] She had no dowry, no expectations, no means of being known, understood, loved, or wedded by a man of wealth and distinction; and so she allowed herself to be married to a minor clerk at the Ministry of Public Instruction.[1][3][4]
She dressed plainly, unable to afford fine clothes, but she was as unhappy as a woman who has fallen from her proper station.[1] For women have no caste or race, their beauty, grace, and charm serving them in place of birth and family.[1][2] Their natural finesse, innate elegance, and nimbleness of wit are their only hierarchy, elevating a girl from the common people to the equal of the grandest ladies.[1][2][5]
She suffered ceaselessly, feeling herself born for all the delicacies and luxuries of life.[1][2] She suffered from the poverty of her apartment, the shabbiness of the walls, the worn-out chairs, and the ugliness of the curtains.[1][2][5] All these things, which another woman of her class would not even have noticed, tortured and angered her. The sight of the little Breton woman who did her humble housework aroused in her despairing regrets and wild daydreams. She dreamt of silent antechambers hung with Oriental tapestries, lit by towering bronze candelabra, and of two tall footmen in knee breeches dozing in large armchairs, made drowsy by the stifling heat of the stove. She dreamt of vast drawing rooms draped in ancient silk, of exquisite cabinets displaying priceless curiosities, and of quaint, perfumed boudoirs made for intimate chats at five o’clock with the closest of friends—men famous and sought after, whose attentions were the envy of all other women.
When she sat down for dinner at the round table covered with a tablecloth that had been used for three days, opposite her husband who, lifting the lid of the tureen, declared with delight, "Ah, a good stew! I know nothing better than that…" she dreamt of lavish banquets, of gleaming silverware, of tapestries peopling the walls with ancient figures and strange birds in a fairy forest; she dreamt of exquisite dishes served on marvelous plates, of whispered gallantries listened to with a sphinx-like smile while eating the pink flesh of a trout or the wing of a ptarmigan.
She had no fine dresses, no jewels, nothing. And these were the only things she loved; she felt she was made for them. She so longed to please, to be envied, to be charming and sought after.[2] She had a rich friend, a former schoolmate from the convent, whom she no longer wished to visit because she suffered so much when she returned home. She would weep for whole days from sorrow, regret, despair, and misery.[2]
One evening, her husband came home with an air of triumph, holding a large envelope in his hand. "Here," he said, "is something for you."[2] She swiftly tore open the paper and drew out a card on which was printed these words: "The Minister of Public Instruction and Madame Georges Ramponneau request the honor of Monsieur and Madame Loisel's company at the Ministry on the evening of Monday, January 18th."[3][4][6]
Instead of being delighted, as her husband had hoped, she threw the invitation on the table with disdain, muttering, "What do you want me to do with that?" "But, my dear, I thought you would be happy. You never go out, and this is an occasion, a fine one! I had infinite trouble to get it.[3] Everyone wants one; it is very select, and not many are given to employees. You will see all the official world there." She looked at him with an irritated eye and declared impatiently, "What do you expect me to wear to go there?"
He had not thought of that. He stammered, "Why, the dress you wear when we go to the theater. It seems very nice to me…" He fell silent, stupefied and dismayed, at the sight of his wife weeping. Two large tears rolled slowly from the corners of her eyes toward the corners of her mouth. He stammered, "What is the matter? What is the matter?" With a violent effort, she had controlled her vexation and responded in a calm voice, wiping her moist cheeks, "Nothing. Only I have no dress and, consequently, I cannot go to this affair. Give your card to some colleague whose wife is better equipped than I."
He was heartbroken. He resumed, "Let us see, Mathilde. How much would a suitable dress cost, something that would serve for other occasions, something very simple?" She reflected for some seconds, making her calculations and also wondering what sum she could ask for without bringing an immediate refusal and a frightened exclamation from the thrifty clerk. Finally, she replied, hesitatingly, "I cannot tell exactly, but it seems to me that four hundred francs ought to cover it." He turned a little pale, for he had been saving just that amount to buy a gun and treat himself to a little shooting next summer on the plain of Nanterre, with some friends who went to shoot larks there on Sundays.[3][6] Nevertheless, he answered, "Very well. I will give you four hundred francs. But try to have a beautiful dress."[3]
The day of the ball drew near, and Madame Loisel seemed sad, restless, anxious. Her dress was ready, however. Her husband said to her one evening, "What is the matter with you? You have been acting strangely for two or three days." "It annoys me not to have a single jewel, not a single stone, nothing to adorn myself with. I shall have such a poverty-stricken look. I would prefer not to go to this party." He replied, "You can wear some natural flowers. In this season they look very chic. For ten francs you can have two or three magnificent roses." She was not convinced. "No… there is nothing more humiliating than to have a shabby air in the midst of rich women." Then her husband cried out, "How foolish you are! Go and find your friend Madame Forestier and ask her to lend you some jewels. You are good enough friends to do that." She uttered a cry of joy. "It is true! I had not thought of that."
The next day she went to her friend's house and related her story of distress. Madame Forestier went to her mirrored wardrobe, took out a large jewelry case, brought it, opened it, and said to Madame Loisel, "Choose, my dear." She saw first some bracelets, then a collar of pearls, then a Venetian cross of gold and jewels, of admirable workmanship. She tried on the ornaments before the mirror, hesitated, but could neither decide to take them nor leave them. Then she kept asking, "Have you nothing more?" "Why, yes. Look for yourself. I do not know what will please you."[1][2] Suddenly, she discovered, in a black satin box, a superb necklace of diamonds, and her heart began to beat with an immoderate desire.[1] Her hands trembled as she took it. She placed it around her throat, over her high-necked dress, and was lost in ecstasy at the sight of herself.[1][2][5] Then she asked, in a hesitant voice, full of anguish, "Can you lend me this? Only this?" "Why, yes, certainly."[1] She fell upon the neck of her friend, embraced her with passion, then fled with her treasure.[2]
The day of the ball arrived. Madame Loisel was a great success.[1][2][5] She was prettier than all the others, elegant, gracious, smiling, and full of joy. All the men stared at her, asked her name, and sought to be introduced. All the officials of the Ministry wanted to waltz with her. The Minister himself noticed her.[5] She danced with intoxication, with passion, drunk with pleasure, thinking of nothing, in the triumph of her beauty, in the glory of her success, in a kind of cloud of happiness composed of all this homage, of all this admiration, of all these awakened desires, of that sense of complete victory that is so sweet to a woman's heart.[2][5]
She left at about four o'clock in the morning. Her husband had been dozing since midnight in a little deserted anteroom with three other gentlemen whose wives were enjoying themselves very much.[2][5] He threw over her shoulders the wraps he had brought for the departure, modest garments of everyday life, whose poverty clashed with the elegance of the ball gown. She felt this and wished to escape so as not to be noticed by the other women who were wrapping themselves in rich furs. Loisel detained her, "Wait a moment. You will catch a cold outside. I am going to call a cab." But she would not listen and descended the steps rapidly. When they were in the street, they found no carriage; and they began to seek one, hailing the coachmen whom they saw passing at a distance.
They walked toward the Seine, hopeless and shivering. Finally, they found on the quay one of those old, nocturnal broughams that one sees in Paris only after nightfall, as if they were ashamed of their misery by day. It took them as far as their door in the Rue des Martyrs, and they went sadly up to their apartment. It was all over for her. And on his part, he remembered that he had to be at the office by ten o'clock.
She removed the wraps from her shoulders before the mirror, for a final view of herself in her glory. But suddenly she uttered a cry. The necklace was no longer around her neck. Her husband, already half undressed, asked, "What is the matter with you?" She turned toward him, panic-stricken, "I have… I have… I no longer have Madame Forestier's necklace." He rose in dismay, "What!… How!… It is impossible!" And they searched in the folds of the dress, in the folds of the cloak, in the pockets, everywhere. They could not find it. He asked, "You are sure you still had it when you left the ball?" "Yes, I felt it in the vestibule of the Ministry." "But if you had lost it in the street, we should have heard it fall. It must be in the cab." "Yes, it is probable. Did you take the number?" "No. And you, did you notice it?" "No."
They looked at each other, utterly cast down. Finally, Loisel dressed himself again. "I am going," said he, "over the whole route we walked, to see if I cannot find it." And he went out. She remained in her evening gown, not having the strength to go to bed, sunk in a chair, without fire, without a thought. Her husband returned at about seven o'clock. He had found nothing.[2] He went to the police and to the cab offices, and put an advertisement in the newspapers, offering a reward. She waited all day in a state of bewilderment before this frightful disaster. Loisel returned in the evening, his face pale and hollow; he had discovered nothing.[2] "You must write to your friend," said he, "that you have broken the clasp of the necklace and that you are having it mended. That will give us time to turn round."[1] She wrote at his dictation.[1][2]
At the end of a week, they had lost all hope. And Loisel, who had aged five years, declared, "We must consider how to replace the jewel."[1] The next day they took the box which had enclosed it, and went to the jeweler whose name they found inside.[1] He consulted his books. "It was not I, madame, who sold that necklace; I must simply have furnished the case."[1] Then they went from jeweler to jeweler, searching for a necklace like the other one, consulting their memories, both sick with grief and anguish. In a shop of the Palais-Royal, they found a string of diamonds that seemed to them exactly like the one they had lost.[5] It was valued at forty thousand francs. They could have it for thirty-six thousand.[5] They begged the jeweler not to sell it for three days. And they made a bargain that he should take it back for thirty-four thousand francs if the other necklace was found before the end of February.
Loisel possessed eighteen thousand francs which his father had left him.[4] He would borrow the rest. He borrowed, asking a thousand francs of one, five hundred of another, five louis here, three louis there. He gave notes, made ruinous agreements, dealt with usurers and the whole race of lenders.[4][5] He compromised his whole existence, risked his signature without even knowing if he could honor it, and, terrified by the anguish of the future, by the black misery which was about to fall upon him, by the prospect of all physical privations and all moral tortures, he went to get the new necklace, depositing on the merchant's counter thirty-six thousand francs.[4][5]
When Madame Loisel took back the necklace to Madame Forestier, the latter said to her, in a frigid tone, "You should have returned it to me sooner; I might have needed it."[4] She did not open the jewel-case, as her friend had feared. If she had detected the substitution, what would she have thought? What would she have said? Would she not have taken her for a thief?
Madame Loisel now knew the horrible life of necessity. She did her part, however, completely, heroically. It was necessary to pay this frightful debt. She would pay it. They dismissed their maid, they changed their lodgings; they rented a garret under the roof. She came to know the drudgery of housework, the odious labors of the kitchen. She washed the dishes, using her rosy nails on the greasy pots and pans. She washed the soiled linen, the shirts, and the dishcloths, which she hung on a line to dry. She took the garbage down to the street every morning and brought up the water, stopping at each landing to catch her breath. And, dressed like a woman of the people, she went to the grocer's, the butcher's, and the fruiterer's with her basket on her arm, shopping, haggling to the last sou of her miserable money. Every month they had to pay some notes, renew others, get more time. Her husband worked in the evening, putting the books of some merchant in order, and at night he often did copying at five sous a page.
And this life lasted for ten years. At the end of ten years, they had paid everything, everything, with the rates of usury and the accumulations of the compound interest. Madame Loisel looked old now. She had become a strong, hard woman, the crude woman of the poor household. Her hair was badly dressed, her skirts were askew, her hands were red. She spoke in a loud tone, and washed the floors with great swishes of water. But sometimes, when her husband was at the office, she would sit down near the window and think of that evening at the ball so long ago, where she had been so beautiful and so flattered. What would have happened if she had not lost that necklace? Who knows? Who knows? How singular life is, and how full of changes! How small a thing will ruin or save one!
One Sunday, as she was taking a walk in the Champs-Élysées to rid herself of the cares of the week, she suddenly perceived a woman walking with a child. It was Madame Forestier, still young, still beautiful, still charming. Madame Loisel felt moved. Should she speak to her? Yes, certainly. And now that she had paid, she would tell her all. Why not? She approached her. "Good morning, Jeanne." The other, astonished to be so familiarly addressed by this common woman, did not recognize her at all and stammered, "But—madame!—I do not know—You must be mistaken." "No. I am Mathilde Loisel."
Her friend uttered a cry of astonishment, "Oh!… my poor Mathilde! How you have changed!" "Yes, I have had some hard days since I saw you, and some miserable ones—and all because of you!…" "Because of me? How is that?" "You recall the diamond necklace that you lent me to wear to the Ministry ball?" "Yes. Well?" "Well, I lost it." "How is that, since you returned it to me?" "I returned another to you exactly like it. And it has taken us ten years to pay for it. You can understand that it was not easy for us who have nothing. But it is finished and I am decently content."
Madame Forestier had stopped short. "You say that you bought a diamond necklace to replace mine?" "Yes. You did not perceive it then? They were very similar." And she smiled with a proud and simple joy. Madame Forestier was deeply moved and took both her hands. "Oh, my poor Mathilde! Mine was paste. It was worth at most five hundred francs!"